Hypothesis Testing
************

.. article-info::
    :avatar: dnl_plastic.png
    :avatar-link: https://www.decisionneurosciencelab.com/
    :avatar-outline: muted
    :author: Elijah Galvan
    :date: September 1, 2023
    :read-time: 2 min read
    :class-container: sd-p-2 sd-outline-muted sd-rounded-1


A clear benefit of computational modeling is that we can directly test different psychological accounts against each other. 
With linear modeling and computational modeling, testing competing hypotheses against each other involves the same logic for designing an experiment: your goal is to create a situation where different psychological accounts make empirically (i.e. behaviorally) distinguishable predictions. 

Where they differ, however, is obvious in the interpretability of the results of the modeling analysis. 

In computational modeling each psychological account, with all of their differing hypotheses about the behavior of interest, are embodied as a single formula and are therefore tested as one cohesive unit: from this we can empirically test these accounts against each other. 
Therefore, we draw a direct conclusion about which psychological account of behavior is correct: with linear modeling this is rarely the case. 

At its best, interpreting the results of a linear modeling analysis is straightforward: ‘the significant effect of independent variable one tells us that hypothesis 1 is not correct and the nonsignificant effect of independent variable two tells us that hypothesis 2 is correct; taken together, this is most in line with psychological account A.’ 
So the conclusions that can be drawn are quite limited for linear modeling, even in the best case scenario. 

In a more realistic scenario, most researchers will simply speculate as to the correct psychological account that they observed the results they observed. 

In computational modeling, we can empirically evaluate these accounts to determine what the correct underlying psychological account of behavior was in that situation.